What are the biggest lessons you have learned in the corporate world? - QuoraThis page may be out of date. Save your draft before refreshing this page.Submit any pending changes before refreshing this page. Hide this message.QuoraSign In Corporate Culture Corporations Life Lessons Learning Business Philosophy of Everyday Life Jobs and Careers Survey Question Career AdviceWhat are the biggest lessons you have learned in the corporate world?UpdateCancelPromoted by LawTrades.comThe best way to form your LLC or corporation. Get $150 off.Work with corporate lawyers to form your business. Deferred fees. Free registered agent & consultations.Get Quote at LawTrades.com/IncorporationAnswer Wiki100+ Answers  Anna Lundberg, Coach for people making career transitions from their corporate jobsUpdated Jun 12, 2016Multinational Procter & Gamble (P&G) is recognised globally as one of the world’s best companies for leaders, with its commitment to internal leadership development and promoting from within, and leadership featuring as one of its five core values (along with integrity, ownership, trust and a passion for winning, which are all in fact values that are also related to leadership).I spent the most formative years of my career at P&G, and I’m incredibly grateful that I did. The experience I gained and the skills I learned there have opened doors to many of the opportunities that I’ve had since leaving the company two years ago, as well as helping me to manage all the many projects and priorities that I have on my plate now that I work independently.These are 10 of the things that I learned at P&G that make me a better leader today…1. You can't meet (and exceed) expectations if you don't know what they areIt’s so easy to launch yourself into a project, to get straight to business when working with a new boss, and think that we’re being productive. Taking the time to clarify expectations upfront, however – whether that be in terms of the work itself i.e. which projects are the most important, what’s the scope, and so on; or in terms of the working relationship i.e. how you can work most effectively together – can avoid a whole lot of time wasting.The same applies as an independent consultant. You can dive straight in and try to solve everything you think needs fixing, but that may or may not be what the client wanted. Clarifying those expectations at the beginning of the relationship, identifying three main areas where you’re going to focus your time and really deliver results, will allow you to deliver the most value while making sure that the client is getting what they want.2. Make sure you’re speaking the same languageAt P&G, and at any large company, there is a whole system of words and expressions and those dreaded TLAs (three-letter acronyms) that you need to understand in order to be able to communicate. Once you have the lingo, this will give you shortcuts to getting your point across and will ultimately get things done more quickly and in a way that everyone agrees with.While this language code can be useful, we also need to remember the poor souls who aren’t quite up to speed. This can include new hires, of course, and external agencies, but you’ll be surprised how sometimes even the more experienced managers won’t have a clear idea of what you’re actually talking about. Agree on a common definition upfront and you’ll be more effective in delivering something that everyone is happy with. In fact, this goes beyond language to encompass fundamental values as well – establishing these upfront will ensure that everyone is on the same page.3. How to take real ownership of a projectAt school, we had parents and teachers telling us to do our homework – at work, not so much (especially when we're freelancers or business owners)! Of course we have our managers and/or clients and if we don’t deliver our projects we’re going to hear about it; but what we’re not going to have is someone leading us by the hand and telling us exactly what to do. We’re responsible for getting the job done in the time that we have and in whatever way we deem appropriate.Even then, though, there are different levels of project delivery, and taking real ownership means going beyond just the bare minimum. Taking real ownership means being proactive and taking the initiative, staying on top of all the milestones and deadlines, following up with others to get their input, and looking beyond the obvious of what you’ve been asked to do to really deliver added value. (In fact, you may remember that ownership is another of P&G’s top values.) This is again how you meet, and exceed, expectations.4. Your priorities are not necessarily the priorities of the people you're working withThis is a big one! As “keen bean” junior managers, we bombard people with emails, we interrupt them at their desks, and we get huffy when they don’t deliver to our schedules and our specifications. Following up relentlessly shows commitment and drive but what it doesn’t show is emotional intelligence. Your priorities are just that, your priorities! At P&G in particular, the whole organisation was built on a system of checks and balances, which by definition meant that each function had a different set of priorities. Finance of course would have one set of success measures, marketing another, and the consumer research department yet another.Working effectively with a multi-functional team means being sensitive to the context, understanding the particular perspective of each individual and what their goals are both globally and in specific reference to the topic at hand, and adapting our behaviour accordingly. Step one here is treating the individual like a human being! Build a rapport and seek to understand where they are coming from and you’ll be much more effective working together in the long run.5. Performance isn't enough (- the PIE model)There was a “secret” model at P&G that we weren’t supposed to tell junior managers for fear that they would misunderstand it and change their behaviour in an ill-advised way. The model was PIE and told you the “formula” for how promotions and salary increases would be applied. ‘P’ stands for ‘performance’ and this is what you’d expect, how well you do your job. There are two more elements, however, which are ‘I’ – ‘image’ i.e. how you are perceived by your peers and most of all your seniors – and ‘E’ – ‘exposure’ i.e. it’s no good doing wonderful work if no one knows who you are or what you’re doing.So the trick is definitely not to become a political animal and forget about doing any actual work; but likewise there's no point in putting your head down and getting on with it like a good girl and expecting someone to notice and reward you accordingly. Instead, you need to be aware of these other two parts of the puzzle, image and exposure, and make sure that while you’re delivering excellent work you’re also thinking about who needs to see that work and what impression you’re giving more generally in the organisation. If nothing else, you never know who will be your next boss!6. You're responsible for your own training and developmentAt P&G, we changed assignment every two years, giving us an opportunity to gain experience in different aspects of our function (in my case, what we called marketing “design” and “delivery”) as well as different business units. I was a superstar, of course, and I expected the offers to be falling at my feet – but I quickly learned that I needed to go out and look for the roles that I wanted. In doing so, I looked for something that would challenge me and let me learn new things, while exposing me to different people (see #5!) and giving me broader experience that would stand me in good stead for future roles.I also took ownership of my learning early on, making sure that I signed up to every possible training that I could benefit from in one way or another. Your boss will be busy, and may not be on top of exactly which courses you have and haven’t been on. Personal growth and development is a top value for me so this was particularly important in my case, but really it’s something that is important for everybody in both their personal and their professional lives.7. The magic happens when you focus on your strengths, not your weaknessesTraining and development is great, but while it’s admirable to try to get good at everything this is simply not possible, and both you and the business will be better served if you learn to focus on your areas of strength. Of course, when we first start in a company or a role there will be certain things we need to learn to do – project management, time management, and so on – but beyond that there will always be some freedom to discover what we’re good at and use that to our advantage.P&G did this really well: in our annual rating sessions we were asked to highlight our three biggest strengths and only one weakness, and even then we didn’t call it a weakness but an “opportunity”. So you’re good at public speaking and delivering training workshops? Maybe you’re a number-crunching guru and a superstar at drawing up possible scenarios? Or what about creative brainstorming, getting the team excited behind a common vision, or mentoring interns? Find opportunities to use your strengths and you will shine.8. The power of effective business writingI was amazing at writing at school, in fact I was so good that my English teacher would make copies of my essays and hand them out to the rest of the class. Get me! So it was a bit of a shock when I started my first job at P&G and found that essay writing was not the same thing as business writing. On top of that, an international environment where most people were not native speakers meant that simple and unambiguous communication was crucial. Effective business writing had a specific objective, used clear and concise language, active tense rather than passive; it wasn’t about sounding clever or being poetic.Learning to write an effective business document – a recommendation, a report, or just an email for that matter – will allow you to get your message across quickly and effectively, to influence people with a more persuasive argument, and to impress people with your convincing business results. The ability to distil complicated matters into a clear and well thought-out message is a useful skill in all areas of life, above and beyond the corporate world.9. You have to make choicesAh, choices. This is a biggie. The long-time guru of P&G, two-time CEO A. G. Lafley wrote a book about it, Playing to Win: How Strategy Really Works, and we even had a made-up word, “choiceful”, that every manager worth his salt would drop into any given conversation. We have to be choiceful.So what does this mean? Well, you can apply this at a couple of different levels. First, looking at your project list: you need to identify which projects will have the biggest impact and then focus your time on those projects – it’s far too easy to get bogged down in little tasks and trivial details. Second, at the macro level, a brand strategy is choice: we’ll focus on this market OR this market, we’ll invest here OR there, we’ll prioritise this OR that. Giving a laundry list of every possibility, or saying that “it’s all important”, is the path to failure.10. There's no such thing as work-life balanceI’ve written about this before and I’ll say it again: the concept of work-life balance is a completely false dichotomy; and I think it was P&G that taught me this. During my first years at P&G I was the poster child of “work hard, play hard” – me and everyone else. We were all straight out of university, young and single, hardworking and ambitious. We worked late and partied later. In the good old days before the economic crisis, P&G even encouraged this with extravagant “off sites” where romance (or something a bit less Hollywood) blossomed and new relationships, with a varying degree of seriousness, were formed.The point is that you can’t hate your job, counting the minutes until you get to go home at 6pm, the days until the weekend, the weeks until the next vacation. That’s no life at all. Instead, I'm a big fan of work-life integration, where we enjoy our professional endeavours and spending time with our colleagues just as we have fun while working hard on our personal interests in our time “off”. I’ve never felt happier or more fulfilled than I do now, working harder than ever on my own businesses and projects and having a blast while doing it.I’ve just co-authored a book in which we've collected our own insights (and mistakes) along with those of almost 40 other managers and executives from Procter & Gamble and other successful companies. The book, How to Succeed in Your First Job, is now available on Amazon. We'd be grateful if you shared it with your peers and especially with any young managers you know who could benefit from these lessons early on in their career. Any reviews would also be welcome, in order to help the right people find the book!Here are the UK and US links but the book is available worldwide so please visit your local site:How to Succeed in Your First Job (UK), andHow To Succeed In Your First Job (US).60.6k Views · View UpvotesPromoted by Zoho CorpA one-stop solution to all your business accounting needs.Send invoices, accept payments online, record taxes, and generate financial reports with Zoho Books.Sign Up at zoho.com/booksRelated QuestionsMore Answers BelowWhat are the main lessons a fresh out of college employee needs to learn in the corporate world?What are some harsh life lessons the corporate world taught you?What life lesson did you learn the hard way?What life lessons have video games taught you?What are the life lessons one can learn from Batman?  Mike Schoultz, Working on my third career over 49 years.Written Mar 24, 2016Tough to name just one as I have done much learning over the years and I will never be done.I have been in management and leadership positions in the military and business world for forty years and I often get asked what the best lessons I have found. Surprisingly (or not) my list of lessons probably have varied to a degree, depending on when in my career it was constructed. The following lessons represent my favorite lessons on business management that I believe could make the biggest impact. If I was starting my career over and could take    leadership lessons back in time with me, these are the ones I would choose:Create an environment of continuous learningIt is absolutely necessary that business people be good learners. They need to instill this in all their team. Theymust learn from their mistakes. To be most successful, managers must acknowledge, understand, and improve on their shortcomings. And they must encourage their team to also focus on continuous learning.Be a multiplierMultiplier business managers know that at the apex of the intelligence hierarchy is NOT the lone genius. Rather, it is the genius who knows the importance of bringing out the smarts and capabilities in everyone in the team.Related material: Lessons Learned in Life … Class Continues DailyBuild connectionsBoth managers and leaders know their job with their teams is about building lots of connections. They make people feel theyhave a stake in common problems.Encourage feedbackIt is vital that you let your team know you are interested and will listen to their concerns and ideas and contribute to solutions to any and all problems. Offer recognition and always share successFocus on building team confidence by publiclyrecognizing their efforts and achievements. Think of it this way; anything ispossible if you share the glory. Giving others a chance to claim credit is aneasy, and effective, way to magnify results. Be decisiveOne of the key jobs of a manager is to be an effective decision maker. Employees are never comfortable with managers who make slow decisions and the frequently change their minds. Quality managers make decisions quickly and stick with them. Building and maintaining trustAlways do what you say and set good examples. Demand from yourself the same level of professionalism and dedication that you expect from others. Trust, once broken, is seldom restored to its original state. It is the most fragile yet essential attribute of leadership and management. Mike Schoultz is the founder of Digital Spark Marketing, a digital marketing and customerservice agency. With 40 years of business experience, he blogs on topics thatrelate to improving the performance of your business. Find him on G+, Twitter, and LinkedIn.  45.5k Views · View UpvotesPromoted by Switch App for JobsPassive job seekers who are actually looking for a new job.Hire qualified engineers, marketers, sales experts, product managers, designers, and more. Free on SwitchLearn More at www.switchapp.com/hiring   Glenn Beck, Founder, TheBlaze. Radio & TV Host. Entrepreneur.Updated Jan 8, 2015 · Upvoted by  Evan Asano, CEO & Founder: Mediakix.com and  Steve Waddington, CEO, Director, CIO, Engineering Manager.Never be the smartest person in the room.Always listen to your inner voice.  If it "feels wrong" it is.Debt makes you and your company a slave to someone.It is never wrong to do the right thing.  It is never right to do the wrong thing.  The ends DO NOT justify the means.   The Ten Commandments are also great safety tips no matter who said them.Don't hire employees or friends.  Hire people who believe in the vision and want to partner because it makes them feel alive to be apart of something bigger than them or us.Remember who you wanted to be when you were a kid.  You didn't EVER want to be the dream killer, paper pusher or suit.  You wanted to change the world.  Why aren't you changing the world?  Age is a mind set and the older you are mentally, the less dynamic change you will capture and create.Love your people. If your end users are viewed as people who are "clicks"  or just customers you will fail.   If you care about them, you will make the product that will actually make their life better or easier.  You both win. Most companies are upside down.  Prioritize:A) principalsB) people (love and respect your end users/vendors and employees/partners-- If you have those as your solid foundation and you protect those two things, the next two fall into place naturally.C) product. If you know the first two the product becomes obviousD) profit.  It is a byproduct.  Never forget that. Making profit your goal is the easiest way to become all that you despise.Make your word you bond.  Contracts are important but your word is more so.  Let your yes mean yes and no mean no always.  The spirit of the deal is just as important as the words of the deal.  Never dishonor yourself.Plan on being mocked or told it will never work.  Sometimes they are right, but the best ideas do seem crazy at first to most or everyone would already be doing it.Know not what you do or make.  But why.  That is the difference between a guy who makes computers and Steve jobs.  He knew why.  ART.With God all things are possible.There is no such thing as compartmentalizing ethics.  You can not cheat on your wife or taxes but be honest and trustworthy at the office.   Fix your character flaws.  We all have them.   Master them or they will master you.Make your weakness your strength.266.9k Views · View UpvotesMoreRelated QuestionsWhat is the biggest lesson you learn from being an early high flyer?What are the life lessons you have learned from the movies?What was your biggest mistake and what was the lesson you learned?What are the lessons or tips I should learn before entering the job or corporate world? What it is like to be in the working/ job world?What are the most important lessons you have learned in your life and when did you learn them?What are some of the biggest lessons you want your children to learn from you and your life so far?What do we learn from corporate world?What are the advantages of virtual learning? Is it really helpful in the corporate world?What are the biggest lessons you have learned about sales?What life lessons does Game of Thrones teach us?Life: What is the biggest lesson you have learned from being successful?What is the biggest lesson you learn from failure?What’s the biggest lesson CEOs and founders learn?What's the best lesson you've learned?What is the biggest lesson you have learned as college student?Related QuestionsWhat are the main lessons a fresh out of college employee needs to learn in the corporate world?What are some harsh life lessons the corporate world taught you?What life lesson did you learn the hard way?What life lessons have video games taught you?What are the life lessons one can learn from Batman?What is the biggest lesson you learn from being an early high flyer?What are the life lessons you have learned from the movies?What was your biggest mistake and what was the lesson you learned?What are the lessons or tips I should learn before entering the job or corporate world? What it is like to be in the working/ job world?What are the most important lessons you have learned in your life and when did you learn them?In other languagesEn español: ¿Cuáles son las mayores lecciones que has aprendido en el mundo empresarial?Top StoriesRead MoreWho is your favorite historical figure?  Ernest W. Adams, Game Design Consultant, Author, and ProfessorWritten Feb 11, 2016Harriet Tubman Born a slave about 1822 in Dorchester County, Maryland.Beaten and whipped by various masters.Suffered a severe head wound when her master threw a heavy metal weight at another slave and hit her instead. This left her with pain, dizziness, and fainting spells for the rest of her life.Escaped from slavery in 1849.Returned in secret to rescue other members of her family, traveling b...Read MoreHow would you answer the question, "If everyone else jumped off a cliff, would you jump, too?”  Ashi Culnai, studied at International School of Zug and LuzernWritten Dec 19I hate this question. I hate it. But I found a simple and funny solution for answering it:‘If everyone else jumped off a cliff, would you jump too?’‘Sure. There’d be a huge pile of bodies to land on.’It’s funny, and will most likely release some tension. :)Read MoreHow long can an astronaut stay in ISS?  Robert Frost, works at NASAWritten Jan 16, 2015 · Upvoted by  Abhijeet Borkar, PhD in Physics (Astrophysics)"Can"?  We don't know.  Typically crew members stay for about six months.  This March, however, we will launch an astronaut (Scott Kelly) and a cosmonaut (Mikhail Kornienko) that will stay there for a full year.  By studying how they react in those second six months, we will gather more data that will help us understand how a two year journey to Mars will affect crew members.    Both Scott and ...Sitemap#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZAbout - Careers - Privacy - Terms - Contact