
100 Good Books to Read: Book Recommendations by Topic
James Clear
About
Articles
Books
Master Class
Reading List
Free Newsletter
The Best Books: Recommended Reading ListThe page is a reading list sharing the best books to read in various categories based on many hours of reading and research. You’ll find more than 100 good books to read, organized by category.
This is a reading list is for people who don’t have time for unimportant books. I only list the best books to read in each category. You can be sure that each one is fantastic and will be worth your time.
Want to keep things simple? Check out the “10 Best” lists under the Start Here section to get some great book recommendations without feeling overwhelmed by all the options.
I. Start Here: The Best Books of All-Time
Looking for more good books to read? Click the links below to jump to a specific category.
10 Best Nonfiction Books
10 Best Fiction Books
25 Best-Selling Books of All-Time
II. Best Nonfiction Books
These are the best nonfiction books to read, listed by category.
Best Art and Creativity Books
Best Biographies and Memoirs
Best Business Books
Best Fitness Books
Best History Books
Best Philosophy Books
Best Psychology Books
Best Science Books
Best Self-Help Books
Best Writing Books
III. Best Fiction Books
These are the best fiction books to read, listed by category.
Best Novels of All-Time
Best Classic Literature Books
Best Fantasy Books
Best Mystery Books
Best Poetry Books
Best Science Fiction Books
IV. Book Summaries
For many of the nonfiction books I read, I publish my personal notes and write a three sentence summary of the main ideas in the book. You can read all of these notes on my book summaries page.
V. How to Read More Books
I use a simple process to read a lot of books. If you’re interested in reading books more consistently, you may find it useful.
Get the simple system I use to read more plus a checklist you can use to start your own reading habit by clicking here. It’s a free PDF I’ll email to you.
Home
Articles
Books
Master Class
Reading List
Contact | Copyright © 2017 | Terms and Privacy | Thank YouView Full Site
